TELCODOCS-1576: Image-based upgrade with Lifecycle Agent (#69809)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/ztp-image-based-upgrade-prep.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
// Epic TELCOSTRAT-160 (4.15/4.16), story TELCODOCS-1576
// * scalability_and_performance/ztp-talm-updating-managed-policies.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ztp-image-based-upgrade-prep_{context}"]
= Preparing the {sno} clusters for the image-based upgrade

When you deploy the {lcao} on a cluster, a blank `imageBasedUpgrade` CR is automatically created.
You use this CR to specify the image repository of the seed image and to move through the different stages.

> In the `Prep` stage, the {lcao} ensures that the target clusters are ready for the upgrade by checking if they meet certain conditions. The {lcao} also precaches any additional listed images on the target clusters from the seed image.

Reviewer: It also checks that the seed image is compatible with the LCA operator deployed.

You can complete this stage well before starting the upgrade.

> After you start the `Prep` stage by applying the `imageBasedUpgrade` CR with {cgu-operator}, {cgu-operator} applies a policy that starts the following procedures:

Reviewer: Not sure how deep we want to go on applying things with TALM. Written like this for a user that does not know anything about TALM/ZTP/GitOps it cannot be understood. Looks like TALM applies CRs. Here it is stated that moving to Prep requires TALM however in the example below it shows a patch command to modify the Stage spec from Idle to Prep in the target cluster. That is confusing.

I would try to briefly detail/add:

* A link to TALM and GitOps ZTP process
* Explain that it can applied in the target cluster manually as shown in the patch command, but if you're running a fleet of clusters that want to upgrade a GitOps approach is more convenient. In that case, when your target clusters are managed by a ACM hub cluster, you can use GitOps ZTP to create policies that can be enforced and targeted to the clusters you decide via TALM. In that case, the dataprotectionApplication and the secret configuration can be applied to one or multiple clusters in a batch of 1 or more.  

To give more context, this GitOps approach + TALM can be done with almost every change you want to apply: moving IBU through the different stages, install OADP, apply OADP backups & restore config, install LCA... it makes sense when you're dealing with a fleet of clusters and you want to manage the software/configuration lifecycle of your managed clusters. Hope it helps instead of being more confusing.

Author: It helps, thank you for writing out the explanation! I will remove this for now and come back to connecting it to TALM/ZTP, once the workflow itself is cleaned up.

Author: @alosadagrande If the user is doing it without TALM, "who" creates the DPA CR and the secret to the bucket? Is that all manually done by the user or (partially) automated by OADP?

Reviewer: It is not automated by OADP.  It is part of any OADP configuration, so it must be applied either by the user or it can be applied using GitOps (e.g. Argo) or any automation tool that the user has.

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ztp-image-based-upgrade-prep_{context}"]
= Preparing the {sno} clusters for the image-based upgrade

When you deploy the {lcao} on a cluster, the Operator creates an `imageBasedUpgrade` CR.
You use this CR throughout the upgrade process to move through the different stages.

In the `Prep` stage, the {lcao} ensures that the nodes are ready for the upgrade by checking if the cluster meets certain conditions.
You can complete this stage well before starting the upgrade.

After you start the `Prep` stage by applying the `imageBasedUpgrade` CR with {cgu-operator}, {cgu-operator} applies a policy that starts the following procedures:

* Installing and configuring the OADP Operator
* Adding a `DataProtectionApplication` CR that points to the S3 backend
* Adding a secret for the S3 credentials that are referenced in the `DataProtectionApplication` CR

These resources are deleted after the upgrade is complete or if a rollback is initiated.

.Prerequisites

* You have installed {cgu-operator}.
* You have installed {lcao}.
* You have generated a seed image from a compatible seed cluster.

// are there other prereqs?

> .Procedure

Reviewer 2: This has to be done as part of the installation of the target system

Reviewer: Correct, also include installation of the OADP operator as prereq, otherwise the DataProtectionApplication CR that is stated to be applied by TALM a couple of lines above would not be applied since cluster does not understand that CR.

. Apply the shared container folder `MachineConfig` CR to make `/var/lib/containers` shared between `ostree` updates.
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f <shared_MC_folder>
----

. Update the `seedImageRef.version` and `seedImageRef.image` fields in the `ImageBasedUpgrade` CR:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: lca.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: ImageBasedUpgrade
metadata:
  name: example-upgrade
spec:
  stage: Idle
  seedImageRef:
    version: 4.14.0
    image: <seed_container_image>
----
// For telco, we need a sample with extraManifests and oadpContent

. Move the CR to the `Prep` stage:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch imagebasedupgrades.lca.openshift.io upgrade -p='{"spec": {"stage": "Prep"}}' --type=merge -n openshift-lifecycle-agent
----

+
The {lcao} checks for the health of the cluster and pulls the seed image to the target cluster.
Then, the Operator pre-caches all the required images.

// What else, if anything?

.Verification

. Check that the new stateroot with the target version exists:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ rpm-ostree status -v

Reviewer 2: I don't think these steps shouldbe part of an end customer workflow. Basically when the status is Prep completed these are done,

Author: Good point, these are redundant then. However, I'll leave the IBU CR status check, that could be useful for general monitoring.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
// Epic TELCOSTRAT-160 (4.15/4.16), story TELCODOCS-1576
// * scalability_and_performance/ztp-talm-updating-managed-policies.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ztp-image-based-upgrade-prep_{context}"]
= Preparing the {sno} cluster for the image-based upgrade

> When you deploy the {lcao} on a cluster, a `ImageBasedUpgrade` CR is automatically created.

Reviewer 3: s/a/an

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: lca.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: ImageBasedUpgrade
metadata:
  name: example-upgrade
spec:
  stage: Idle
  seedImageRef:
    version: 4.14.6 <1>
    image: <seed_container_image> <2>
  additionalImages:
    name: ""
    namespace: ""
  autoRollbackOnFailure: {} <3>
#    disabledForPostRebootConfig: "true" <4>
#    disabledForUpgradeCompletion: "true" <5>
#    disabledInitMonitor: "true" <6>
#    initMonitorTimeoutSeconds: 1800 <7>
#  extraManifests: <8>
#  - name: sno-extra-manifests
#    namespace: openshift-lifecycle-agent
#  oadpContent: <9>
#  - name: oadp-cm-example
#    namespace: openshift-adp
----
<1> Specify the platform version on the seed image.
<2> Specify the repository where the target cluster can pull the seed image from.
<3> By default, automatic rollback is enabled throughout the upgrade.
<4> Disables automatic rollback when the reconfiguration of the cluster fails upon the first reboot.
<5> Disables automatic rollback after the {lcao} reports a failed upgrade upon completion.
<6> Disables automatic rollback when the upgrade does not complete after reboot within the time frame specified in the `initMonitorTimeoutSeconds` field.

> <7> Specifies the time frame in seconds where. The default value is `1800` seconds or 30 minutes.

Reviewer 3: remove the period, lowercase The?

Author: Deleting `where`, so it says:
> Specifies the time frame in seconds. The default value is `1800` seconds or 30 minutes.

> <8> Specify the extra manifests that you want to apply to the target cluster.

Reviewer 4: I am confused, what are these extra-manifests? The ones installed by ZTP on day-0, or other more extra ones?

Author: I believe these are the ZTP Day 0 extra manifests. I marked it for optional use alongside with the automatic rollback fields

<9> (Optional) Add the `oadpContent` section with the OADP `ConfigMap` information.

. Change the value of the `stage` field to `Prep` in the `ImageBasedUpgrade` CR:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch imagebasedupgrades.lca.openshift.io upgrade -p='{"spec": {"stage": "Prep"}}' --type=merge -n openshift-lifecycle-agent
----

+

> The {lcao} checks for the health of the cluster and pulls the seed image to the target cluster.

Reviewer 2: and creates a new ostree stateroot.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
// Epic TELCOSTRAT-160 (4.15/4.16), story TELCODOCS-1576
// * scalability_and_performance/ztp-talm-updating-managed-policies.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ztp-image-based-upgrade-prep_{context}"]
= Preparing the {sno} cluster for the image-based upgrade

When you deploy the {lcao} on a cluster, an `ImageBasedUpgrade` CR is automatically created.
You edit this CR to specify the image repository of the seed image and to move through the different stages.

.Prerequisites

* Install {lcao} on the target cluster.
* Generate a seed image from a compatible seed cluster.
* Install the OADP Operator on the target cluster.

> * Create an S3-compatible storage solution and a ready-to-use bucket with proper credentials configured. For more information, see _Additional resources_.

Reviewer 5: Link to additional resources, please

----
<1> Disables the hash generation at the end of the `ConfigMap` filename which allows the `ConfigMap` CR to be overwritten when a new `ConfigMap` CR is generated with the same name.

.. Create the `ConfigMap` CR:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ kustomize build ./ -o oadp-cm.yaml
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: oadp-cm-example
  namespace: openshift-adp
[...]
----

.. Apply the `ConfigMap` CR:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f oadp-cm.yaml
----

. Edit the `ImageBasedUpgrade` CR:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: lca.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: ImageBasedUpgrade
metadata:
  name: example-upgrade
spec:
  stage: Idle
  seedImageRef:
    version: 4.14.7 <1>
    image: <seed_container_image> <2>
    pullSecretRef: <seed_pull_secret> <3>
  additionalImages:
    name: ""
    namespace: ""
  autoRollbackOnFailure: {} <4>
#    disabledForPostRebootConfig: "true" <5>
#    disabledForUpgradeCompletion: "true" <6>
#    disabledInitMonitor: "true" <7>
#    initMonitorTimeoutSeconds: 1800 <8>
#  extraManifests: <9>
#  - name: sno-extra-manifests
#    namespace: openshift-lifecycle-agent
#  oadpContent: <10>
#  - name: oadp-cm-example

> #    namespace: openshift-adp

Reviewer 6: +1

> #    namespace: openshift-adp

Author: Mentioned in other comment, I'll update OADP-related content to be not optional.
If your question refer to extramanifests and the autorollback configurations too, those are optional.

----

> <1> Specify the platform version on the seed image.

Reviewer 6: We need to expand on it. 
The version must match the seedimage version or the upgrade will fail complaining about mismatch

<2> Specify the repository where the target cluster can pull the seed image from.
<3> Specify the reference to a secret with credentials to pull container images.

> <4> By default, automatic rollback is enabled throughout the upgrade.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
<4> By default, automatic rollback on failure is enabled throughout the upgrade.
```

<5> (Optional) Disables automatic rollback when the reconfiguration of the cluster fails upon the first reboot.
<6> (Optional) Disables automatic rollback after the {lcao} reports a failed upgrade upon completion.
<7> (Optional) Disables automatic rollback when the upgrade does not complete after reboot within the time frame specified in the `initMonitorTimeoutSeconds` field.

> <8> Specifies the time frame in seconds. The default value is `1800` seconds or 30 minutes.

Reviewer 7: Missing the "optional" tag. If not specified, the default of 1800 seconds is used.

> <8> (Optional) Specifies the time frame in seconds. If not defined, the default value is `1800` seconds or 30 minutes.

Author: I'm adding clarification to the rollback section. WDYT?
> By default, an automatic rollback is enabled on the following conditions:
> * If the reconfiguration of the cluster fails upon the first reboot.
> * If the {lcao} reports a failed upgrade upon completing the process.
> * If the upgrade does not complete within the time frame specified in the `initMonitorTimeoutSeconds` field after rebooting.

> <8> (Optional) Specifies the time frame in seconds. If not defined, the default value is `1800` seconds or 30 minutes.

Reviewer 5: s/enabled/initiated

But otherwise, this clarifies the issue
Thanks

If the `lca.openshift.io/apply-label` annotation is used in the `Backup` CR, only the resources listed in the annotation will be backed up, even if other resource types are specified in the `spec` section or not.
====
--

.. Define the apply order for the OADP Operator in the `Backup` and `Restore` CRs by using the `lca.openshift.io/apply-wave` field:
+
--
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: velero.io/v1
kind: Restore
metadata:
  name: restore-acm-klusterlet
  namespace: openshift-adp
  labels:
    velero.io/storage-location: default
  annotations:
    lca.openshift.io/apply-wave: "1"
spec:
  backupName:
    acm-klusterlet
---
apiVersion: velero.io/v1
kind: Restore
metadata:
  name: restore-example-app
  namespace: openshift-adp
  labels:
    velero.io/storage-location: default
  annotations:
    lca.openshift.io/apply-wave: "3"
spec:
  backupName:
    example-app
---
apiVersion: velero.io/v1
kind: Restore
metadata:
  name: restore-localvolume
  namespace: openshift-adp
  labels:
    velero.io/storage-location: default
  annotations:
    lca.openshift.io/apply-wave: "2"
spec:
  backupName:
    localvolume
----

> +

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion

```
nit ^

![image](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/assets/13664224/c742a715-60e4-4dc7-8f92-e9a014100e71)

<7> (Optional) If set to `true`, this option disables automatic rollback when the upgrade does not complete after reboot within the time frame specified in the `initMonitorTimeoutSeconds` field.
<8> (Optional) Specifies the time frame in seconds. If not defined or set to `0`, the default value of `1800` seconds (30 minutes) is used.
<9> (Optional) Specify the extra manifests to apply to the target cluster that are not part of the seed image.
<10> Add the `oadpContent` section with the OADP `ConfigMap` information.

. Change the value of the `stage` field to `Prep` in the `ImageBasedUpgrade` CR:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch imagebasedupgrades.lca.openshift.io example-upgrade -p='{"spec": {"stage": "Prep"}}' --type=merge -n openshift-lifecycle-agent
----

+
The {lcao} checks for the health of the cluster, creates a new `ostree` stateroot, and pulls the seed image to the target cluster.
Then, the Operator precaches all the required images on the target cluster.

// What else, if anything?

.Verification

. Check the status of the `ImageBasedUpgrade` CR.
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc get ibu -A -oyaml

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
$ oc get ibu -oyaml
```

no need to ask for -A, this resource is *not* namespaced

// Module included in the following assemblies:
// Epic TELCOSTRAT-160 (4.15/4.16), story TELCODOCS-1576
// * scalability_and_performance/ztp-talm-updating-managed-policies.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ztp-image-based-upgrade-prep_{context}"]

> = Preparing the {sno} clusters for the image-based upgrade

Reviewer 9: General Q: is this feature only for SNO clusters? Can it be used with for eg., 3 node clusters, standard clusters, etc.

Author: Yes, it's limited to SNO clusters only

At this stage, the {lcao} ensures that the nodes are ready for the upgrade by checking if the cluster meets certain conditions.
You can complete this stage well before initiating the upgrade.

> After you initiate the preparation stage by using {cgu-operator}, {cgu-operator} applies a policy that starts the following procedures:

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
After you start the preparation stage with {cgu-operator}, {cgu-operator} applies a policy that starts the following procedures:
```

* Installing and configuring the OADP Operator
* Adding a `DataProtectionApplication` CR that points to the S3 backend
* Adding a secret for the S3 credentials that are referenced in the `DataProtectionApplication` CR

These resources are deleted after the upgrade is complete or if a rollback is initiated.

.Prerequisites

* You have installed the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).

* You have logged in to the hub cluster as a user with `cluster-admin` privileges.

* You have installed {cgu-operator}.

// are there other prereqs?

.Procedure

. Move to the next stage by changing the `Idle` value to `Prep` in the `ImageBasedUpgrade` CR.
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: lca.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: ImageBasedUpgrade
metadata:
  name: example-upgrade
spec:
  stage: Prep
  seedImageRef:
    version: 4.14.0

>     image: quay.io/<seed_image_repository>

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
    image: <seed_container_image>
```

----
// For telco, we need a sample with extraManifests and oadpContent

. Apply the `ImageBasedUpgrade` policy with {cgu-operator}.
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f example-upgrade.yml
----
// Please check command

> The {lcao} checks for the health of the cluster and pulls the seed image to the target cluster.

Reviewer 9: "pulls the seed image to the target cluster" any details on this? is it cached somewhere?
